---
layout: default
title: My IDE of Choice Is...
description: How Visual Studio Code Won Me Over
---
### {{ page.title }}

I recently had a couple of months in between jobs. Developers should spend some
of their time off devoted to learning. This was my plan, but I handed in Webstorm
when I turned in my Mac to my old employer! I wanted to learn, but I did not want
to spend time getting used to different IDEs. It need to be a smooth transition.

I set up the Gnome desktop on Ubuntu since it's Mac-like. In fact, I find it a
bit more intuitive than the Mac. It's just that it's running on crappy hardware
with a touchpad that frustrates me. Otherwise, I'm loving Gnome!

Whatever IDE I chose needed to run on Linux. It needed to be free. I kept
expectations low but ended up blown away by one free IDE! Here are the three free
IDEs I tried out:

#### Atom

Atom is free and has a lot of potential. I actually did a couple of projects with
it, but something was lacking. Atom has some annoying defaults, such as welcome
pages that you have to go into settings to turn off. It's a solid choice, but Atom
just does not replace Webstorm!

#### Intellij IDEA Community Edition

I had a code challenge that required Java, so I installed IDEA. This is a pretty
easy transition from Webstorm since it's made by the same company. I have nothing
but good to say about Jetbrains! The only problem is that Javascript support
requires the paid edition. A company has to make money!

#### Visual Studio Code

When I decided years ago to switch from Windows development to Linux, I never
looked back. That's another very long article, but I can sum it up quickly. Few
of us actually need anything made by Microsoft. People think they need Word and
Excel. I use Google Docs and never need any "advanced" features from MS Office,
and if I did, I could probably use Open Office or Libre Office. You don't need
Exchange/Outlook for email. There are dozens of alternatives available. 

From a developer's standpoint, Microsoft provided a miserable landscape for
deploying software. Internet Information Services (IIS), the web server, had to
be installed manually. That means, it could not be scripted at the time I left
the Microsoft herd. Windows had licensing fees, which was a huge barrier to
scaling and load balancing web services. Everything required money and manual
processes. Docker and Linux, by comparison, makes everything cost efficient
and repeatable.

That was the state of the Microsoft world I left. I'm sure things are better
with Azure, but I've never been interested enough to check it out. There are
other hopeful signs, such as a Linux shell in Windows 10. The other surprise
is a free, cross-platform edition of Visual Studio.

Visual Studio was a necessary piece of the puzzle when doing .Net or C++
development for the Windows platform. You would get an expensive Microsoft
Developers' Network (MSDN) subscription, find the correct DVD, and wait an
hour or two for the the thing to install. But nowadays, there's a free version of the
IDE, it installs instantly on Linux, and it has all the goodies I use in a
development environment. You can debug. You can be a polyglot without changing
your IDE. You get great auto-completion support. It's loaded, and I'm not sure
why Microsoft did this.

My two favorite features:

1. Having an integrated shell. I don't like switching windows to get to BASH,
and this is a nice convenience reminiscent of Webstorm.
2. Global settings with project overrides. I was doing some contract work
recently, and the team I was working for used a tab size of 2. I generally use
4, not that I give this much thought. The cool thing is that I can set my global
indent to 4, and I can use project settings to override it to 2 when necessary.

Again, I'm not sure what Microsoft gets in return for this cool IDE. The least
I can do is help get the word out. This IDE is big time, and I'm going to use
it rather than buying Webstorm again. Check it out [here](https://code.visualstudio.com/).